Adds description for the form element manager to the documentation (#196)
laminas/laminas-form: docs/book/v3/form-element-manager.md

It handles all included form elements of laminas-form, user-defined elements and also whole forms.

The manager is based on the [plugin manager of laminas-servicemanager](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-servicemanager/plugin-managers/).

## Benefits

The following benefits are provided by the manager:

- Handles all forms, fieldsets and elements, including all custom ones.
- Create forms, fieldsets and elements with all dependencies like validators and filters.
- Can create forms, fieldsets and elements with name and options.
- Can provide elements, fieldsets and forms without prior registration.
- Fetches hydrators and input filters from the application's service container and add them to a form or a fieldset.
- Allows to override existing elements or to extend them.

## Create a Form Element Manager

To create an instance, the form element manager requires a PSR-11 dependency container. The following examples uses the container implementation of [laminas-servicemanager](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-servicemanager/):

```php
$formElementManager = new Laminas\Form\FormElementManager(
    new Laminas\ServiceManager\ServiceManager()
);

> ```

Reviewer: In practice, users will generally just pull the `FormElementManager` **_from_** the `ServiceManager`, though; this usage here is going to be quite rare, no?

## Fetch a Standard Element

To get a supplied form element, use the class name of the element:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(Laminas\Form\Element\Select::class);
```

## Fetch and Configure a Standard Element

> Internally, the included factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory::class` for all types of elements, fieldsets and forms is used to create an element. This factory allows to configure an element, fieldset or form on creation:

Reviewer: This feels passive to me. Maybe rephrase to:

```markdown
The form element manager uses the factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` to create all elements, fieldsets, and forms.
```

and then remove the second sentence entirely (as it is redundant).

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(
    Laminas\Form\Element\Select::class,
    [
        'name'    => 'rating',
        'options' => [
            'label'         => 'Rating',
            'value_options' => [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
            ],
        ],
    ]
);
```

> The name for the element and the array with options are set as parameter to the constructor of the object on instantiation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name for the element and the options array are provided as parameters to the associated class constructor on instantiation.
```

```php
public function __construct($name = null, iterable $options = []) {}
```

```php
$element->getName(); // rating
$element->getLabel(); // Rating
$element->getValueOptions(); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

## Fetch a Custom Element without Registration

> The form element manager allows to fetch custom elements without prior registration on the manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The form element manager allows fetching custom elements without prior registration with the manager.
```

The following example creates a custom element:

```php
final class ExampleElement extends Laminas\Form\Element
{
    // …
}
```

The form element manager can create these custom element by the related class name:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(ExampleElement::class);
```

> Also here, the included factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory::class` is used by the manager to instance the element which allows the pass the name and options like before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The manager uses the factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` to instantiate the element, and will pass the name and options array just like in the prior example:
```

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(
    ExampleElement::class,
    [
        'name'    => '…',
        'options' => [ 
            // …
        ],
    ]
);
```

## Register and Fetch a Custom Element with a Factory

If a custom element needs some preparation for creation then a factory can be used.

The following example creates a class as factory for the element:

```php
final class ExampleElementFactory
{
    public function __invoke(Psr\Container\ContainerInterface): ExampleElement
    {
        $element = new ExampleElement();
        $element->setOption('example_param', 'value');
        
        return $element;
    }
}
```

Register the custom element on the form element manager by using a factory class:

```php
$formElementManager->setFactory(
    ExampleElement::class,
    ExampleElementFactory::class
);

> ```

Reviewer: I wonder if we should demonstrate adding the factory _via configuration_ as well? And/or detail that programmatic addition like this should be done in a delegator factor for the `FormElementManager` service?

Author: > I wonder if we should demonstrate adding the factory _via configuration_ as well?

Right, but the configuration in an application is added on a separate page. I think this can be found better via the navigation and it doesn't make these pages even longer.

Author: I will check another option via tabs like we already have in laminas-i18n.

https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-i18n/filters/alnum/#using-locale

Reviewer: My main point is: in both laminas-mvc and Mezzio applications, you almost NEVER programmatically add factories to the form element manager. You would instead configure them.

The one place you might programmatically add them is via a delegator factory, though, again, that's specific to the Laminas ecosystem (as it's a feature of laminas-servicemanager).

But it comes back to: we should show the most common use cases as the primary examples, and then anything manual like this as a secondary example.

Author: _It's nice to see that the explanations for the integration in the application are now being taken into account. 😄_ 

---

To make it clear, the basics of the manager is to be explained here and nothing more, nothing less.
The usage in laminas-mvc and Mezzio are created separately. Then links and explicit coloured notes will also be added to this page here.
And the explanations for laminas-mvc and Mezzio will get their own entry in the navigation, because these explanations are important and should be clearly visible.

> …we should show the most common use cases as the primary examples, and then anything manual like this as a secondary example.

Unfortunately, this realization comes too late, because all documentations are written exactly the other way around. And now we have to deal with it.

See also the related project: https://github.com/orgs/laminas/projects/3

Get the custom element and the option:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(ExampleElement::class);

echo $form->getOption('example_param'); // value
```

Now the custom factory will be used to instance the element.

## Fetch a Form without Registration

The form element manager handles also whole forms.

The following example creates a class as form:

```php
final class ExampleForm extends Laminas\Form\Form
{
    public function init(): void
    {
        // …
    }
}
```

The form element manager can create the form by the related class name:

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(ExampleForm::class);
```

> If no separate factory is required, then the form element manager will be instantiating the form class directly, by using the standard factory for elements `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory::class`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no separate factory is required, then the form element manager will be instantiating the form class directly, by using the standard factory for elements (`Laminas\Form\ElementFactory`).
```

## Register and Fetch a Form With a Factory

If a form needs some preparation for creation then a factory can be used.

The following example creates a class as factory for the form:

```php
final class ExampleFormFactory
{
    public function __invoke(Psr\Container\ContainerInterface): ExampleForm
    {
        $form = new ExampleForm();
        $form->setName('example');
        
        return $form;
    }
}
```

Register the form on the form element manager by using a factory class:

```php
$formElementManager->setFactory(
    ExampleForm::class,
    ExampleFormFactory::class
);

> ```

Reviewer: Same comment here as for lines 124-129.

Get the form and the name:

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(ExampleForm::class);

echo $form->getName(); // example
```

Now the custom factory will be used to instance the form.

## Set a Paramater to a Form on Instantiation

The options of a form can be used to set custom parameters to a form.

> Create a class for the form and get a custom option:

Reviewer: Detail:

- You can hook into initialization via the `init()` method.
- The form element factory calls the `init()` method after creating an instance of the class.
- Since the name and options are processed in the constructor, you can access them via `init()` to perform further customizations for the instance.

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(
    ExampleForm::class,
    [
        'options' => [ 
            'example_param' => 'value',
        ],
    ]
);

echo $form->getOption('example_param'); // value
```

## Usage of the Form Element Manager in a Form

If an element is added to a form via the `add` method and the definition of the element is provided via an array then the form factory `Laminas\Form\Factory::class` will be used to create this element.
The form factory uses the form element manager to fetch the element.
The following example uses a custom element in a form:

```php
final class ExampleForm extends Laminas\Form\Form
{
    public function init(): void
    {
        $this->add([
            'type'    => ExampleElement::class,
            'name'    => 'example',
            'options' => [
                // …
            ],
        ]);

        // …
    }
}
```

Fetch the form:

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(ExampleForm::class);
```

The form element manager will provide the form with the custom element which is created by the form element manager, like before: with or without explicit registration of the element.

> ## Why Using the Form Element Manager?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why Use the Form Element Manager?
```

> - Allows to overwrite or to extend elements without change form specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It allows overwriting or extending elements without changing form specifications.
```

> - Allows decoration of elements, like adding a database adapter without passing the adapter through all layers of a form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It allows decoration of elements, like adding a database adapter without passing the adapter through all layers of a form.
```

> - Handles correct instantiation with configuration and dependencies of elements, fieldsets and forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It manages instantiation and initialization of elements, fieldsets and forms, including all dependencies and configuration options.
```

> - Allows usage and configuration of custom elements without prior registration of the elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It allows usage and configuration of custom elements without prior registration of the elements.
```

> - Handles all types of objects of a form; elements, fieldsets and the form itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It handles all form object types: elements, fieldsets and the form itself.
```

# Form Element Manager

The form element manager is a *specialized* dependency injection container to obtain objects which implements the `Laminas\Form\ElementInterface` interface.

The manager is the central object of laminas-form to create and retrieve all types of form elements, fieldsets and forms.

It handles all included form elements of laminas-form, user-defined elements and also whole forms.

The manager is based on the [plugin manager of laminas-servicemanager](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-servicemanager/plugin-managers/).

## Benefits

The following benefits are provided by the manager:

- Handles all forms, fieldsets and elements, including all custom ones.
- Create forms, fieldsets and elements with all dependencies like validators and filters.
- Can create forms, fieldsets and elements with name and options.
- Can provide elements, fieldsets and forms without prior registration.

> - Fetches hydrators and input filters from the application's service container and add them to a form or a fieldset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fetches hydrators and input filters from the application's service container and adds them to a form or a fieldset.
```

> - Allows to override existing elements or to extend them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows overriding existing elements or extending them.
```

> INFO: **Stand-Alone Usage**
> The following examples show the basics of the form element manager using stand-alone usage.
>
> The configuration and usage in **laminas-mvc** or **Mezzio** based application [can be found in separate sections](#learn-more).

## Create a Form Element Manager

> To create an instance, the form element manager requires a PSR-11 dependency container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an instance, the form element manager requires a [PSR-11 dependency container](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-11/).
```

> The following examples uses the container implementation of [laminas-servicemanager](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-servicemanager/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples use the PSR-11 container implementation provided by [laminas-servicemanager](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-servicemanager/):
```

```

## Fetch and Configure a Standard Element

The form element manager uses the factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` to create all elements, fieldsets, and forms.
This factory allows the configuration of an element during fetching:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(
    Laminas\Form\Element\Select::class,
    [
        'name'    => 'rating',
        'options' => [
            'label'         => 'Rating',
            'value_options' => [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
            ],
        ],
    ]
);
```

The name for the element and the options array are provided as parameters to the associated class constructor on instantiation:

```php
public function __construct($name = null, iterable $options = []) {}
```

Retrieving the name and the set options:

```php
echo $element->getName(); // rating
echo $element->getLabel(); // Rating

$valueOptions = $element->getValueOptions(); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

## Fetch a Custom Element without Registration

The form element manager allows fetching custom elements without prior registration with the manager.

The following example creates a custom element:

```php
final class ExampleElement extends Laminas\Form\Element
{
    // …
}
```

> The form element manager can create these custom element by the related class name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The form element manager can create these custom elements by the related class name:
```

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(ExampleElement::class);
```

The manager uses the factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` to instantiate the element, and will pass the name and options array just like in the prior example:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(
    ExampleElement::class,
    [
        'name'    => '…',
        'options' => [ 
            // …
        ],
    ]
);
```

## Register and Fetch a Custom Element with a Factory

If a custom element needs some preparation for creation then a factory can be used.

> The following example creates a class as factory for the element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates a factory class for the element:
```

```php
final class ExampleElementFactory
{
    public function __invoke(Psr\Container\ContainerInterface): ExampleElement
    {
        $element = new ExampleElement();
        $element->setOption('example_param', 'value');
        
        return $element;
    }
}
```

Register the custom element on the form element manager by using a factory class:

```php
$formElementManager->setFactory(
    ExampleElement::class,
    ExampleElementFactory::class
);
```

Get the custom element and the option:

```php
$element = $formElementManager->get(ExampleElement::class);

echo $form->getOption('example_param'); // value
```

> Now the custom factory will be used to instance the element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the custom factory will be used to create the element instance.
```

## Fetch a Form without Registration

> The form element manager handles also whole forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The form element manager also handles whole forms.
```

> The following example creates a class as form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates a form class:
```

```php
final class ExampleForm extends Laminas\Form\Form
{
    public function init(): void
    {
        // …
    }
}
```

The form element manager can create the form by the related class name:

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(ExampleForm::class);
```

If no separate factory is required, then the form element manager will be instantiating the form class directly, by using the standard factory for elements (`Laminas\Form\ElementFactory`).

## Register and Fetch a Form With a Factory

If a form needs some preparation for creation then a factory can be used.

The following example creates a class as factory for the form:

```php
final class ExampleFormFactory
{
    public function __invoke(Psr\Container\ContainerInterface): ExampleForm
    {
        $form = new ExampleForm();
        $form->setName('example');
        
        return $form;
    }
}
```

Register the form on the form element manager by using a factory class:

```php
$formElementManager->setFactory(
    ExampleForm::class,
    ExampleFormFactory::class
);
```

Get the form and the name:

```php
$form = $formElementManager->get(ExampleForm::class);

echo $form->getName(); // example
```

> Now the custom factory will be used to instance the form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the custom factory will be used to instantiate the form.
```

## Set a Paramater to a Form on Instantiation

The options of a form can be used to set custom parameters to a form.

* It can be hooked into the initialization via the `init()` method.
* The form element factory calls the `init()` method after creating an instance of the class.

> * Since the name and options are processed in the constructor, it can be accessed them via `init()` to perform further customizations for the instance.

Reviewer: These lines are bullet points... elsewhere, we've used `-` for bullet points, versus `*` as used here; what's the recommendation in our style guide?

Author: Interesting that this is not recognised by the linter tool. :man_shrugging:

> * It can be hooked into the initialization via the `init()` method.
> * The form element factory calls the `init()` method after creating an instance of the class.
> * Since the name and options are processed in the constructor, it can be accessed them via `init()` to perform further customizations for the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It can be hooked into the initialization via the `init()` method.
* The form element factory calls the `init()` method after creating an instance of the class.
* Since the name and options are processed in the constructor, it can access them within `init()` to perform further customization of the instance.
```

Create a class for the form and get a custom option:

```php
final class ExampleForm extends Laminas\Form\Form
{
    public function init(): void
    {
        /** @var mixed|null $exampleParam */
        $exampleParam = $this->getOption('example_param');

        // …
    }
}
```

> The standard factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` for form elements and forms is used which sets the name and/or the options to the object on creation via constructor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard factory `Laminas\Form\ElementFactory` for form elements and forms is used which provides the name and/or the options to the object as arguments to the constructor:
```
